---
layout: post
title: On Intention And Friction
date: "2017-07-05T00:34:53-04:00"
---

When I moved to Richmond, VA, I was very very worried about finding a job. I had
a lot of things to worry about. Well more than I had in NYC. I had a young
family to provide for while my partner recovered and worked on the book she's
now writing. I also couldn't find a job while I was transitioning to VA from
NYC. And it could have been for a lot of different reasons. And I don't feel
like I'll ever know why I never got a call back or why I never made it past the
culture interview. I'll never know why people took me for a ride thinking an
interview process was going well only to have them at the last minute tell me
that things didn't work out. Either education background or experience were
cited the most.

At the time, I had been a web developer for three and half years and software
engineer for a little over one. I cite the difference because I really feel like
I had reached a new plateau in my career once my software skills turned to
actually solving problems versus solving how to show things with JavaScript. I
had a little over a year of experience around DevOps, software release cycles,
Kanban, Scrum, Agile, TDD, and thriving developer communities.

I gave up all this to move to a place where I could easily and comfortably raise
my family. _What I also got was a huge shock to the system._ I mean, I knew I
was riding the line between arrogance and confidence. It was easy when so many
different job opportunities either land in your lap or they were a few
networking opportunities away. New York City is a place that is not only always
on, but always hiring; at least in tech.

With my first job outside of NYC, I found myself in a very uncomfortable
situation. I felt a total lack of control for both the direction of my career
and the stability of my life. So with that, I decided I would take on a new
personal project. I made all sorts of arguments and exuded with excitement when
I would describe it to my wife and friends. I would learn Vim while learning
Tmux and improve my workflow. I would give myself a direction in my career even
if it was something **as useful** as a text editor. I mean in hindsight, I
probably should have taken up a hobby or something outside of the computer. But,
I persisted and taught myself how to do something, once again, in a vacuum using
only the two things I can do really well; research and resiliency.

While the technical parts of this journey might be interesting to some, for now
I'll have to leave that to a future post in **Dress Code**. For now I want to
really dive into the emotional and mental parts of this transition for me. It's
not pretty, but I think it shows a particular part of me which I either have to
channel into the right project or remember to call a spade a spade when I see
one.
